Today, a phone call that
could alter the course of a war.
The planned phone call
between President
Biden and Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
This will be the first call
between the two leaders
since that tragic incident
where seven aid workers were killed
in an Israeli strike in Gaza this week.
Top White House
officials are telling CNN
that Biden is both angry and outraged
about it.
This morning,
the founder of World Central Kitchen,
the aid workers work for chef Jose Andres
is accusing Israel of systematically
his word, targeting
the aid convoy car by car.
And he is calling
for an independent investigation into it.
This was not just
but like the situation where, oops,
we dropped the bomb in the wrong place or
or No,
but I know
is that we were targeted deliberately,
nonstop until everybody was
dead in this convoy.
CNN's Arlette
Sines is at the White House
with more for us and Arlette.
Democratic Senator
Chris Coons is very close to Joe Biden.
He was just on speaking to Sara
and he said this phone call he expects
is going to be very important
in the next step
in the US Israel relationship.
Yeah, Kate.
And President Biden
is expected
to convey his personal anger
and frustration directly to Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
as they speak in the coming hours.
The the Israeli strike that killed
these seven aid workers
with World Central Kitchen
really marks the latest flashpoint
in an increasingly tense
relationship between Biden and Netanyahu.
And many are questioning
whether this moment could serve
as a turning point in U.S.
support for Israel
as it conducts his campaign
to root out Hamas in Gaza.
Now, the president
has expressed his outrage
about the incident.
Frustration has been rising here
at the White House.
The president is expected
to focus on the death
of those aid workers,
while also broadening
out the conversation,
trying to discuss ways
to ensure that there are protections
for humanitarian aid workers.
We have sources have told us that U.S.
officials have already started
talking to the Israelis
about the need to change
the way that information is transmitted
when it comes to the locations
of aid workers.
We also anticipate the president
to talk about the ongoing
hostage and humanitarian
aid negotiations
to try to get a temporary cease fire,
as well as that operation
that Israel is expected to wage in Rafah.
Now, ahead of this call,
Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin
spoke with his Israeli counterpart,
Yoav Gallant,
where a Pentagon spokesperson said
that he conveyed his outrage
while also saying that this incident
reinforces U.S.
concerns about needing
to protect civilians
in any type of operation
that Israel conducts in Rafah.
But even as we have seen
this heightened
rhetoric from the administration
expressing anger and outrage,
well, we have not seen yet
is any shift in policy
when it comes to the U.S.
approach to Israel,
especially when it comes to the U.S.
continuing to provide military support
to Israel without any conditions.
Officials here at the White House
said that they are not at that point
where there is a shift in policy,
though
a senior administration
official says that there has been a shift
in the frustrations from the president.
Now, this all comes as President
Biden is also facing
significant pressure
here at home
when it comes to his handling
of this conflict.
He heard that directly from Muslim
community leaders
here at the White House on Tuesday.
But many are questioning
whether this exact moment
could serve as any turning point
in the administration's strategy.
As of now,
it doesn't seem that they're changing
any pathway forward
in the imminent future.
Or plans at the White House.
Thank you so much, our lot, Sara.
All right. Thank you, Kate.
CNN chief
International anchor
Christiane Amanpour is joining us now.
Christiane,
we just heard from Senator Coons,
who says there is a line
and there should be conditions
and the president of the United States
has been very frustrated,
we know, with Netanyahu and Israel's
approach in Gaza at this point.
The pressure is really mounting
on Israel from other close allies.
What are you hearing?
Well, precisely that.
And really in the United States,
you'd have to go back
as far as the first George W. George H.W.
Bush administration
when they expressed
public frustration
and anger over different issues,
the increasing building of settlements.
And James Baker held out a phone number
for the State Department to say,
when you're serious, give us a call.
You have the number.
But what does this actually change,
this mounting pressure,
As you heard from all that,
it's unlikely
to change
any shift towards
sending military aid to Israel.
But that is precisely
what governments around the world,
Israel's allies,
are being asked to do,
including here in the U.K.
Defense minister, former
prime minister and Foreign Minister
David Cameron has said
that he has demanded
to his Israeli counterpart
an immediate investigation
into this
appalling attack on aid workers.
And he said, we want to see that happen
very, very soon.
The problem here
is that all the allies say
that Israel has a right to defend itself
after what happened on October seven,
but that it must act within the rules
of the international road
that are international laws
that include
not firing on civilian convoys.
And let's not forget
this one, like the others,
were heavily coordinated with Israel.
This is what the U.N.
humanitarian chief
told me about the World Central Kitchen
assassinations or attacks on Monday.
Yes, it's
a duty of care problem,
but it's also a legal problem.
A attacks on humanitarian institutions
and workers
is prohibited under international law.
So whether
it's intentional or not, it's a crime.
And we must be very conscious of this
as I say.
It's been happening,
as you know, Christiane,
to our colleagues from the outset.
And as you know, hundreds,
nearly 200 U.N.
and other aid workers
have been killed, the vast
majority of them Palestinians.
Sara.
You know,
it strikes me in your conversation
that he said
whether it's intentional or not,
it is still a crime.
What is the impression
that Netanyahu and his administration
is giving to those who are calling for
for better treatment of civilians?
What are you hearing?
Well, look, it's really, really difficult
to understand this.
Even former
President Trump has told
and you can see it on an Israeli
website, Israel Hayom,
it's a right wing website.
They interviewed him earlier
and even he said,
you've got to stop your war.
Yes, you could defend yourself,
but you've got to stop this.
You're losing your international
credibility and support.
And we cannot keep seeing these bodies
piling up in Gaza.
So this is really becoming a memory
Trump gave Netanyahu
everything he wanted,
moving the consulate
and the embassy to Jerusalem, giving them
sovereignty over the Golan
Heights, practically inviting them
to annex the West Bank.
He was very much in Netanyahu's camp.
But right now, as we as I've said,
there's an increasing number
of allied governments,
allies of Israel,
who are looking at
the very serious matter
of continuing to send the massive weapons
systems and the bombs, 2000 ton bombs
from the United States
that owe to time bombs
that are being sent.
And again, here is Jose Andres
on his conversation with President Biden.
I spoke to President Biden yesterday
and Biden made this statement,
which seems it's already a harder stand.
But
it's very complicated to understand
that we are going to be sending
America is going to be sending his Navy
on these military
to do humanitarian work,
when at the same time
weapons provided by America,
not not to defend Israel itself
from missile attacks, but used weapons
that are killing
civilians in this moment.
And as you can imagine,
if international aid organizations
like the UN, like Jose Andres, stop doing
their vital humanitarian work,
who is going to do it?
Is Israel going to do it?
That's all that's left.
And we saw the catastrophe
when they tried that,
you know, freelancing
a few weeks ago
and some 118
people were killed in shootings
and a stampede.
It's a very critical issue right now.
Christiane Amanpour,
thank you so much
for all of your reporting, as always.
John.
As we are standing by for that phone call
between the president
and prime minister,
there already has been one conversation
between us
and Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin
and his Israeli counterpart.
So what took place there
seen as the torture portrait
at the Pentagon to torture?
What did they have to say?
Well, John, it was largely,
largely a mirror
image of the conversation
that President Biden had or that
the statement
that President Biden had issued earlier
this week that he was expressing outrage
over this W.K. strike.
Secretary Alston
apparently told the Israeli
defense minister
that he, too, was outraged
by this attack,
and he urged them to conduct
a swift, thorough
and independent investigation
into this attack.
And importantly,
something that we've heard
from other administration
officials as well,
they want the results
of this investigation to be made public
and they want someone
to be held accountable for this
tragic mistake,
which is what the Israelis
are characterizing it as.
But the administration is really,
at this point
kind of withholding judgment
about whether or not this was deliberate.
And for that reason,
they are not giving any sense
of whether or not
they're going to shift
their policy towards
Israeli defense and arms sales,
which have been ongoing,
as we reported earlier this week.
The administration is set to approve
an $18 billion F-15 sale to the Israelis,
where the jets won't
necessarily be delivered
for another 4 to 5 years.
There are questions
about why the administration,
while they're expressing
outrage over this strike,
while they're expressing outrage over
the fact that Israel does not appear
to be doing enough
to protect civilians,
is engaging in these arms sales
with the Israelis
and thereby kind of
affirming that they view them
as kind of a professional military
that is capable of
carrying out these operations
in a way that is consistent
with how the U.S.
would expect their allies to.
And so
Secretary Austin did reiterate
that he is angry about this strike.
It remains to be seen
whether anything
is actually going to change
when it comes to concrete.
U.S.
actions, because at this point,
it does not seem as though
the Israelis are necessarily
listening to what the U.S. is saying.
And we're seeing that
play out in real time,
of course,
with the operation that they're planning
in southern Gaza in Rafah.
Yes, indeed, Indeed, that is the case.
Obviously, a very important day
as we watch it unfold.
Natasha Bertrand at the Pentagon,
thank you very much.